Xconq
{{short description|1987 open-source strategy video game}}
{{Infobox software
|title= Xconq
|screenshot= File:Xconq.jpg
|caption= 
|developer= Stan Shebs, Greg Fisher, Robert Forsman, Alain Brossard, Michael Peters, etc.
|repo = xconq.cvs.sourceforge.net
|released= [[1987 in video gaming|1987]] (Version 1.0)
|genre= [[Single-player]], [[Multiplayer video game|multiplayer]], [[4X game|4X]], [[turn-based strategy]]
|website = 
|platform= [[Unix]]/[[Linux]]/[[X11]], [[Macintosh]], [[Amiga]] and [[Microsoft Windows|Windows]]
|license = [[GNU General Public License|GPL-2.0-or-later]]
}}

'''''Xconq''''' is an [[open-source software|open-source]] computer [[strategy game]]. This [[multiplayer video game]] was first posted to [[comp.sources.games]] on 9 July 1987.
''Xconq'' is released as [[free and open-source software]] under the terms of the [[GNU General Public License|GNU GPL-2.0-or-later]].

==Gameplay==
Originally a straightforward [[video game clone|clone]] of ''[[Empire (1977 video game)|Empire]]'', later versions included the ability to define rulesets for different kinds of games,<ref name=ucr>{{cite book | last = Rosen | first = Kenneth H. |author2=Douglas A. Host |author3=Rachel Klee |author4=Richard R. Rosinski  | title = UNIX: The Complete Reference | publisher = McGraw-Hill Professional | year = 2007 | url = https://books.google.com/books?id=2Et--84HIkwC&q=xconq&pg=PP1 | isbn= 978-0-07-226336-7 | page = 780}}</ref> first using a [[Forth (programming language)|Forth]]-like syntax, then a more powerful version based on [[Lisp programming language|Lisp]] syntax. It was also ported to other computer systems, including [[Macintosh]], [[Amiga]], and [[Microsoft Windows|Windows]].

''Xconq'' is designed to be [[porting|portable]] and re-definable. The default ruleset is similar to ''Empire'', but the ruleset, graphics, and maps can be altered to represent different time periods and strategic scales. Example rulesets provided with the game include Napoleonic strategy, Beirut guerilla fighting, World War II [[grand strategy]], and [[Godzilla]] destroying Tokyo. It can be played by multiple human or AI-controlled players over a network or via [[Hotseat (multiplayer mode)|hot seat]] play.

==History==

Stan Shebs started working on a simple ''Empire'' clone in 1986, initially using [[Curses (programming library)|Curses]] for its interface, then adding an [[X Window System|X10]] interface.<ref>[http://sources.redhat.com/ml/xconq7/2006/msg00008.html ''Re: Family tree of xconq'', by Stan Shebs, on the xconq7 mailing list, Mon, 02 Oct 2006 09:38:57 -0700]</ref> He posted this version to comp.sources.games in July 1987.<ref>{{Cite newsgroup|newsgroup=comp.sources.games|message-id=1384@tekred.TEK.COM|title=xconq - multiplayer strategy game for X-windows, Part02/07|url=https://groups.google.com/group/comp.sources.games/msg/ca34838c40c26911?dmode=source&output=gplain&noredirect}} ''v01i082: xconq - multiplayer strategy game for X-windows[sic], Part02/07'', in comp.sources.games</ref>  It used a map based on squares rather than hexes, and supported multiple players by exploiting X's capability for a single program to open windows on multiple displays, although it accepted input from only the player whose turn it was; other players could not even scroll their map display. Even this first version included support for three rulesets (the "standard" Empire-like game, a Napoleonic-era game, and ancient Greeks), but they were defined by C structures and had to be compiled in.

Shebs switched the game to use hex-based maps, added a postfix language to define the ruleset to be used when a game started, and changed the X interface to allow all players to interact simultaneously; these versions were numbered 2, 3, and 4, but were not released widely. After the addition of an [[X11]] interface written by [[Chris Peterson (developer)|Chris Peterson]], version 5.0 was posted to comp.sources.games (as "xconq5") in June 1988.

1989 saw the first attempt at a client/server version, ''uconq''.

The Macintosh [[Porting|port]] was developed in 1993.

Although work had started on version 7.5, there has been little development since 2004, with the last [[Concurrent Versions System|CVS]] commit made in 2007.<ref>[http://sourceforge.net/mailarchive/forum.php?forum_name=xconq-cvs forum_name=xconq-cvs] on [[sourceforge.net]]</ref>

==See also==
* [[List of open source games]]

==References==
{{Reflist|30em}}

==See also==
*[[List of 4X video games]]

==External links==
* [http://sourceware.org/xconq/ Official site]
* [http://xconq.sourceforge.net/ Downloads and info] on [[sourceforge.net]]

{{Video game engines}}

[[Category:Computer wargames]]
[[Category:Turn-based strategy video games]]
[[Category:Open-source video games]]
[[Category:Strategy video games]]
[[Category:1987 video games]]
[[Category:Windows games]]
[[Category:Unix games]]
[[Category:Amiga games]]
[[Category:Linux games]]
[[Category:Classic Mac OS games]]
[[Category:MacOS games]]
[[Category:Video game clones]]
[[Category:4X video games]]
[[Category:Video game engines]]
[[Category:Video games developed in the United States]]
[[Category:Free software that uses Tk (software)]]